# Preface

## Why?

>Entitled and richly deserving of the 1000 times more money than an average person made by working hard is exactly how kings, queens and nobility felt. They ruled and gave us the darkest times in human history. Times of stifled growth, stifled innovation and excruciating wars.

As a manager, and a good one that I had become after a while of learning this craft, I realized that what I do everyday is just common sense, but I get paid so much more for it. Very soon, I felt that I deserved the 135 times more that I was getting paid than an average employee. Only to reflect back and understand that  entitled and richly deserving of the 1000 times more money than an average person made by working hard is exactly how kings, queens and nobility felt. They ruled and gave us the darkest times in human history. Times of stifled growth, stifled innovation and excruciating wars.

Then came democracy and one of the most explosive periods of growth that our civilization has every experienced. However our corporations for the most part are still run as if they are ruled by a ruler and his henchmen. No wonder such autocratically ruled corporations are dying at a rapid pace - the average age of an S&P 500 corporation is just 15 years now. Which means that on an average in 15 years every one of the S&P500 corporation will be dead and replaced by a better, more democratic, more innovative, more decentralized corporation.

And the same might be case of democratic rule in countries. In the last 50 years in almost every country in the world, cunning human beings have figured out how to hijack democracy and make it work for them personally. These cunning individuals take over law making of that country. They take over its money supply. They take over its natural resources and throw everyone else in that country in a deep cycle of  servitude.

All because only the very few know the dark art of managing people. This is a humble attempt at collaboratively documenting this dark art, of bringing it to light and helping the next generation of growth minded, non zero-sum innovators understand people better and grow larger teams, larger corporations and do good for humanity.

I heard Jeff Bezos state his dream that he wishes for a trillion human beings in space. He wishes for 1000s of Einstein's, 1000s of Mozarts - what a wonderful world will that be. Is a world like that possible? Truly, it is. Is it probable? NO, unless we democratize the principals and practice of management, leadership and governance - from corporations to countries to the world.

## Why me?

I was a great programmer and a very good product manager. I had done technical work with extreme success for many small to large companies including Applied Materials, Bank of America, Citibank, Export Import Bank of United States, Fujitsu, GE, Maximus, NIIT Limited, Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines and many others.

> Somehow, the challenge of managing people was never understood by me in structural, scientific terms. The less I understood it, the more I feared it. The more I feared, the more I resented doing it. I wish someone would have explained me then "how human being in work - especially in groups" in very scientific, engineering oriented manner.

I had an ability to understand the needs of my customers. In fact "understanding" was my key strength and I took extreme pride in it. Starting at 7 years of age, I started reading my father's stash of Scientific American magazines and tried to understand science and technology. I was schooled in India where the key focus was on rote memorization. I failed miserably at their way of schooling but I still excelled in tests due to my ability to understand.  Further, my dad used to bring in mechanical and electrical toys. My key joy was not so much in using them, but in opening them and figuring out how they worked.

As I stated working, I used the same talent of understanding to fit together the pieces of available technology and thereby align technology and customers needs ultra precisely. In fact, the Chaos report published by Standish Group cites that software projects only succeed about 60% of the times but my success rate was over 98%.

I was great as an individual performer, a fairly good team leader, but I failed horribly as senior management in the first startup I joined. Even thought understanding and aligning disparate pieces together is what management and leadership are all about. Somehow, the challenge of managing people was never understood by me in structural, scientific terms. The less I understood it, the more I feared it. The more I feared, the more I resented doing it. I wish someone would have explained me then "how human being in work - especially in groups" in very scientific, engineering oriented manner.

I was all operational and zero leadership. I could make people deliver, I could make them work, but I had to drive it. I failed miserably at making them want to do it. I had failed at making them emotionally connected to my goals. I had failed to evoke a sense of purpose and self drivenness to achieve that purpose. To compound my misery, I had tons of cultural sensitivities to deal with. I had operations in 2 locations in India, 3 locations in USA and 2 locations in Europe. I didn't know how to swim well, and metaphorically I just jumped a large cruise ship to sail my dingy in deep shark infested waters.

Everything was perfectly stacked for me to fail but at that point I had failed to recognize it. When I did fail, I went into the very conventional denial and victim thought patterns. I was quite taken back. I didn't think a person of my intelligence should have failed. I didn't think a person of my niceness deserved a failure. But, people were failing me and failing me without me fully understanding why. This threw me into a depression for over 6 months. Simply the worst time for my family and me. They had to bear me with all the fury of a cranky, miserable, sore looser.

Over this time I had  morphed into this person that I did not like. I become unhealthy, spiteful and internally miserable. At this point I was literally killing everything in me and around me. I was killing myself - I was working too hard and had stopped going to the gym. I was killing my relationships - I was traveling a lot on overseas trips and wasn't spending enough time with my toddler son or my wife.

Thankfully, I found meaning in teaching at that point. I realized that I loved people. My only problem was that I had never learnt how they work. I started teaching the 50+ young, fresh engineers we had. I taught them advanced databases and object oriented design. Later I also started teaching elementary and middle school children. I started teaching Mathematics, Science and English. I was passionate and enthusiastic about the potential they represented and was really committed to them.

This work with children was very insightful. It allowed me a window to understanding non-adulterated human behavior. This allowed me much deeper understanding in the psychology of humans as an individual and in small and large groups. I was later very pleasantly surprised to find that almost 100% of my learning on children applied to the grown up audience. The grown up audience had only one major behavioral difference, they had learnt an ability to mask, they had learnt an ability to fake, they had learnt an ability to lie. So as I found myself in situations with adults, I found that taking decisions based on interactions with adults had a higher failure rate than reflecting on a similar situation in the past with children and using the understanding from that situation and applying that to adults rather than the approach I may conceive from feedback of adults. 
